MASTER SERVICES AGREEMENT
THIS MASTER SERVICES AGREEMENT (this “Agreement”) is entered into as of
the 30th day of March, 2011 by and between Cognizant, a Delaware corporation
(“Client”), and Global Laboratory Services, Inc., a Virginia corporation (“GLS”).
WITNESSETH
WHEREAS, GLS is an independent laboratory and inspection company that offers
various laboratory testing, inspection, analytical evaluation, reporting, research and development
and other scientific and regulatory consulting services (the “Services”).
WHEREAS, Client wishes to engage GLS to provide certain Services with respect to
samples provided to GLS by or on behalf of Client and GLS is agreeable to furnishing such
Services to Client as further detailed below and on the attached Statements of Work incorporated
herein and pursuant to the terms hereinafter and thereinafter described.
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing premises, it is hereby mutually
agreed by and between the parties hereto as follows:
1.

Services; Appointment of Representatives.

(a)
Subject to the terms and conditions in this Agreement, the Services to be
performed hereunder will be as specified in one or more (i) Sample Submission Forms, a form of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A, and as such form is submitted by Client to GLS and
agreed to and executed by representatives of both parties (each a “Sample Submission Form”),
and/or (ii) Consulting Services Forms, a form of which is attached hereto as Exhibit B, and as
such form is submitted by GLS to Client and agreed to and executed by representatives of both
parties (each, a “Consulting Services Form”) (each Sample Submission Form and each
Consulting Services Form are also referred to herein as a “Statement of Work” or “SOW”). Each
SOW will be attached to this Agreement and incorporated herein upon execution of same by
both parties in accordance herewith.
(b)
Changes in the scope of the Services (but not changes in the manner of
performing the Services) being performed under this Agreement and each applicable SOW will
be made only if agreed to in writing in the form of an amendment to such SOW executed by
authorized representatives of both parties. In the event of any inconsistency between the
provisions of any SOW and the provisions of this Agreement, the provisions of this Agreement
will control.
(c)
In connection with each SOW, each of Client and GLS will appoint a
designee as the Client representative and GLS representative, respectively, which person shall be
the primary point of contact under such SOW. The representatives will interface regarding the
delivery of and performance of Services arising under the applicable SOW.

2.

Term; Termination.

(a)
This Agreement will commence on March 30th, 2011 and continue for an
initial term of 9 years, and be automatically renewed for successive one-year terms upon the
same terms and conditions as set forth herein unless either party gives the other party at least
sixty (60) days’ written notice of its intent not to renew the term hereof. In addition, this
Agreement may be terminated by either party for any reason upon ninety (90) days’ written
notice to the other party. Further, either party may terminate this Agreement, immediately,
without advance notice, (i) in the event of a material breach of this Agreement by the other party,
which breach is not cured within thirty (30) days after such breaching party’s receipt of notice of
such breach or (ii) if the other party becomes insolvent or seeks protection under any bankruptcy,
receivership, trust deed, creditors arrangement, composition or comparable proceeding, or if any
such proceeding is instituted against the other party (and such proceeding is not dismissed within
ninety (90) days). Upon the expiration or termination of this Agreement, Client will pay GLS all
fees for Services earned as of and through the effective date of expiration or termination and will
also pay and reimburse GLS for all expenses incurred prior to and through the effective date of
expiration or termination and all non-cancelable commitments that shall have been pre-approved
by Client.
(b)
In addition, the parties may terminate one or more SOWs, without
terminating or effecting this Agreement or other SOWs under this Agreement, only upon the
same terms and pursuant to the same procedures set forth above in Section 2(a) or as otherwise
specified in the SOW at issue. Upon the expiration or termination of one or more SOWs, Client
will pay GLS all fees for Services earned as of and through the effective date of expiration or
termination under the SOW(s) and will also pay and reimburse GLS for all expenses incurred
prior to and through the effective date of expiration or termination under, and all non-cancelable
commitments that shall have been pre-approved by Client in connection with, the applicable
SOW(s).
3.

Fees.

(a)
Fees and other charges for the Services will be as specified in Exhibit C
attached hereto, as such Exhibit C may be amended by GLS from time to time, or in the
applicable Consulting Services Form as provided in Section 9(a) below, and will be invoiced by
GLS to Client. GLS will submit invoices to Client on a regular basis and will send a final
invoice to Client upon completion of the Services set forth in a SOW. Unless otherwise
specified in a SOW, payment for the amount invoiced will be due upon presentation of the
applicable invoice and all undisputed amounts will be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of
invoice.
(b)
If there is a dispute regarding an invoice, the issue will first be addressed
by email, a meeting or telephone conference, within thirty (30) days after the date of invoice,
between the representatives representing each party for the applicable project, and the parties
agree to cooperate in good faith to attempt to resolve the dispute. Payment of all amounts due, if
any, upon resolution of such dispute will be made within thirty (30) days after resolution of such
dispute. Client will continue to pay GLS for all Services set forth in a SOW except those
disputed in good faith.

2

(c)
A one percent (1%) per month (12% per annum) service charge will be
added to all undisputed amounts remaining unpaid after the date on which they were due to GLS.
A $40.00 charge will apply to all returned checks.
4.

Samples.

(a)
Sample Requirements. Samples delivered to GLS will be clearly identified
with all information deemed reasonably necessary by GLS, examples of which are set out in
Exhibit A, and as submitted by Client to GLS and agreed to and executed by representatives of
both parties. For tobacco samples, unless otherwise arranged with and approved by GLS in
writing, Client must provide GLS with at least 300 grams of the representative tobacco sample
that has not been ground. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, Client acknowledges
and agrees that, if Client provides GLS with a sample that has been ground (whether with the
approval of GLS or otherwise): (i) the Services performed with respect to such sample, as well as
the results and Work Product (as defined below) derived therefrom, may be compromised; (ii)
GLS will not be responsible or liable in any way for any Services, results or Work Product so
compromised; and (iii) Client will not be entitled to any of the remedies set forth in Section 6(a)
or 13(a) below or elsewhere in this Agreement in connection with such Services, results and
Work Product.
(b)
Delivery of Samples. Unless otherwise arranged with and approved by
GLS in writing, Client will deliver, or cause to be delivered, each sample to GLS’ testing
facilities. Within five (5) business days of delivery to GLS, GLS will notify Client of any
missing samples or samples that are received in a damaged and/or contaminated condition or any
other discrepancy. Upon such notification, Client will provide GLS with additional instructions
regarding such missing, damaged and/or contaminated samples. GLS will have the right to refuse
acceptance of, or to return at Client’s expense, any sample that GLS deems, in its sole discretion,
to present a hazard or an unreasonable risk with respect to its handling and/or analysis.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, Client will retain the risk of loss or damage to
all samples during shipment to GLS.
(c)

Storage and Retention of Samples.

(i)
While in GLS’ control or possession and while not
undergoing testing, GLS will store all samples in accordance with GLS’ policies
in effect from time to time, including, once GLS is qualified, current good
manufacturing practices (“cGMP”), unless special storage procedures are agreed
to by the parties in the applicable Sample Submission Form, in which case, GLS
will comply with such procedures. Notwithstanding the foregoing, GLS will not
be liable for any loss or theft of any samples.
(ii)
GLS will retain all samples following completion of the
relevant Services for at least seven (7) days depending on the nature of the
relevant Services. If Client desires for GLS to retain any samples for a longer
period of time, such longer period of time must be agreed to by the parties and set
forth in the applicable Sample Submission Form. After the retention time set
forth above has expired, GLS will properly dispose of the sample. If so agreed to

3

by the parties and set forth in the applicable Sample Submission Form, GLS will
return non-hazardous samples to Client at Client’s expense.
5.

Performance of Services.

(a)
GLS will perform the Services in a manner consistent with that degree of
care, skill and diligence as is ordinarily exercised by a professional laboratory testing contractor
under similar conditions and circumstances, and each individual whom GLS intends to engage to
perform the Services will possess the qualifications, licenses, skills and experience needed to
perform such Services.
(b)

In performing the Services:

(i)
GLS will be responsible for the professional quality,
technical accuracy, completeness and coordination of all tests, analyses and
reports performed, conducted or prepared by or on behalf of GLS as part of the
Services;
(ii)
GLS will use reasonable commercial efforts in a diligent
manner to perform the Services on a timely basis in accordance with the timing
agreed to by the parties in the applicable SOW, if any;
(iii)
GLS will have sole control and discretion over the means,
methods, techniques, equipment, sequences and procedures its uses to perform the
Services, without having to confer with, or obtain the consent or approval of,
Client; and
(iv)
If GLS implements any material changes in the manner in
which it performs the Services, whether as required by changes in applicable law,
rule or regulation or otherwise, GLS will notify Client of such changes within a
commercially reasonable period of time or as required by applicable law, but will
not be required to confer with, or obtain the consent or approval of, Client in
connection with implementing such changes.
(c)
GLS will comply with all federal, state and local laws, rules and
regulations applicable to the performance of its obligations under this Agreement.
6.

Retesting and Correction of Services and Work Product.

(a)
Client may request that GLS (i) re-perform any Services completed,
and/or review the substance and accuracy of any related Work Product produced, by or on behalf
of GLS hereunder or (ii) correct any inaccuracies or errors in any such Services and/or Work
Product (collectively, “Additional Work”); provided, that Client shall have submitted such
request to GLS in writing (which writing will set forth in reasonable detail the basis of Client’s
request) within seven (7) days after the delivery by GLS to Client of a final report with respect to
the relevant Services, unless otherwise agreed to by the parties in writing. If Client submits any
such written request to GLS, GLS will, within a commercially reasonable period of time,
perform the Additional Work requested to the extent deemed necessary, advisable or appropriate

4

by GLS, in its sole discretion. If, upon completing such Additional Work, GLS confirms its
original results, then Client will be charged for the Additional Work performed by GLS as
provided in Section 3(a). However, Client will not be charged for any Additional Work
performed by GLS to correct any inaccuracies, or errors made by GLS, in the Services and/or
Work Product originally performed or produced by GLS. Furthermore, notwithstanding anything
herein to the contrary, GLS will not be liable for any consequential, incidental, exemplary,
indirect, punitive or special damages, including, without limitation, loss of profits or loss of
business opportunities.
(b)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6(a), Client hereby
acknowledges and agrees that the re-testing of samples by GLS after the 7-day period provided
in Section 6(a) may produce results different from those originally observed by or on behalf of
GLS.
7.

Regulatory Changes; Regulatory Investigations and Inspections.

(a)
Regulatory Changes. In the event any changes or additions to the laws,
rules or regulations of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or any other regulatory authority
(each, a “Regulatory Authority”) (i) require that GLS change the manner in which it performs the
Services and/or (ii) impose additional expenses, charges, fees and costs applicable to GLS and/or
the Services, Client will promptly reimburse GLS for any and all incremental costs incurred by
GLS under this Agreement and the applicable SOW(s) as a result thereof.
(b)

Regulatory Investigations and Inspections.

(i)
In the event a Regulatory Authority notifies GLS of its
intent to undertake an investigation and/or inspection (each, a “Regulatory
Investigation”) of (1) the Services being performed under this Agreement and/or
(2) the samples which are the subject of such Services and in the possession of
GLS or its subcontractors, GLS will, to the extent permitted by applicable law,
notify Client thereof within a commercially reasonable period of time or as
otherwise required by applicable law.
(ii)
If, as part of, in connection with, or as a result of, any such
Regulatory Investigation:
(1)
GLS is requested to disclose any
Confidential Information to the Regulatory Authority or its
designees, then GLS will be permitted to do so as provided in
Section 10(d) below and will not be liable for any such disclosure;
or
(2)
GLS is requested to participate or cooperate
in, or in any way facilitate, such Regulatory Investigation, then (x)
GLS will be permitted to do so in the manner it deems necessary,
advisable or appropriate, in its sole discretion, without having to
confer with, or obtain the consent or approval of, Client, and (y)
Client will promptly reimburse GLS for any and all time and

5

resources expended, and any and all costs, expenses and other
amounts incurred, by GLS in doing so.
(iii)
If any part of any such Regulatory Investigation is to be
undertaken at any of GLS’ or any of its subcontractors’ facilities, Client will not
be permitted to be present at such facilities during such part of the Regulatory
Investigation, unless, and then only to the extent, mandated by applicable law.
(iv)
Upon completion of each Regulatory Investigation, GLS
will provide Client with a copy of any report of the Regulatory Authority’s
findings made available to GLS by the relevant Regulatory Authority, but only to
the extent (1) such report relates to Services performed under this Agreement or
any SOW, and (2) permitted by applicable law.
8.

Accounting Records; Reviews.

(a)
GLS will keep and maintain complete and accurate records, books of
account and other data (but excluding any and all samples which are the subject of the Services
(whether tested in whole or in part)) necessary for the proper administration of this Agreement.
GLS will keep and maintain such documentation for three (3) years after the expiration or
termination of this Agreement.
(b)
Client will have the right, at its sole expense, upon sixty (60) days’ prior
written notice to GLS, to review or to have an outside auditor review GLS’ books and records
relating to the Services performed by GLS under this Agreement, including compliance with
ISO/IEC 17025, and, once GLS is qualified, cGMP; provided, however, that, unless otherwise
agreed to by GLS: (i) any outside auditor engaged by Client to perform any such review must
first sign a Confidentiality Agreement with, and in a form reasonably satisfactory to, GLS, and
Client will be responsible and liable for all acts, omissions and breaches of such outside auditor;
(ii) Client will not be entitled to more than 1 such review (whether performed by Client or an
outside auditor) in any 12-month period during the term of this Agreement; and (iii) neither
Client nor its outside auditor will have the right (1) to review GLS’ financial records, including,
but not limited to, any information concerning GLS’ costs or profit margins related to any
Service provided to Client hereunder or any SOW, (2) to witness the services provided by GLS
for its other customers or (3) to review GLS’ records related to the performance of services for
GLS’ other customers.
9.

Consulting Services.

(a)
During the term of this Agreement, Client may request that GLS provide
to Client certain consulting services related to product sample testing, product regulatory
compliance or other matters. To the extent the parties agree that GLS is to provide any such
consulting services, such consulting services and the fees and other charges for such consulting
services will be specified in the applicable Consulting Services Form.
(b)
Client hereby acknowledges and agrees that GLS shall not be responsible
or held liable in any manner whatsoever for (i) Client’s use of, or any action taken by or on
behalf of Client in reliance upon or in response to, any recommendations, guidance or other

6

information provided or made available to Client by GLS as part of the consulting services
agreed to and provided pursuant to any Consulting Services Form, or (ii) any after effect
resulting from such use or action by or on behalf of Client.
10.

Confidential Information.

(a)
For purposes of this Agreement, “Confidential Information” means all
information or items (including information, data and materials relating to current or prospective
products and processes) made available (whether intentionally or otherwise) to a party or its
affiliates or subcontractors, or its or its affiliates’ or its subconractors’ employees, agents and
other representatives, by or on behalf of the other party and relating to the business, operations,
affairs, technologies, plans and strategies of such other party, whether observed or provided
orally, in written, graphic or electronic form, or in the form of samples, and whether or not
marked, labeled or otherwise identified as “confidential,” “secret” or “proprietary” (it being
acknowledged and agreed that the existence and terms of this Agreement will be considered to
be Confidential Information as to both parties).
(b)
Each party hereby agrees that, with respect to Confidential Information (as
defined below) of the disclosing party, the receiving party will: (i) maintain such Confidential
Information in confidence using the same degree of care the receiving party uses to prevent
disclosure, dissemination or publication of its own confidential, proprietary or secret
information, data, materials and items (but in no event less than reasonable care); (ii) not disclose
such Confidential Information publicly or to any third party in an unauthorized manner; (iii) use
such Confidential Information only for purposes of its obligations under this Agreement, and for
no other purpose; and (iv) disclose such Confidential Information only to its affiliates, its
subcontractors and its, its affiliates’ and its subcontractors’ respective employees, agents and
other representatives, who have a “need-to-know” in connection with, and agree to comply with,
the obligations imposed upon the receiving party by this Agreement (with the receiving party
bearing ultimate responsibility for any breach by such persons or entities of those obligations by
a party to the other party).
(c)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, “Confidential Information” does not
include any information or items that: (i) were generally available to the public, or otherwise part
of the public domain, when received by the receiving party; (ii) become generally available to
the public, or otherwise part of the public domain, other than through breach of this Agreement;
(iii) can be demonstrated by the receiving party to have already been in its possession, or
otherwise known by it, prior to the time of receipt from the disclosing party; (iv) are received by
the receiving party from a third party that is (1) in lawful possession thereof and (2) under no
confidentiality obligation to the disclosing party; or (v) are independently developed by the
receiving party without use of the Confidential Information of the disclosing party.
(d)
If a party receives a request from a Regulatory Authority or by judicial
process to disclose Confidential Information of the disclosing party then the receiving party (i)
will use reasonable efforts to promptly give the disclosing party notice of such required
disclosure in order to afford the disclosing party adequate opportunity to seek a protective order
or other legal remedy to prevent the disclosure, (ii) will reasonably cooperate with the disclosing
party’s efforts to secure such a protective order or legal remedy, and (iii), if efforts seeking such

7

order or remedy are unsuccessful, will take reasonable steps to seek confidential treatment of
such information or items to be disclosed.
(e)
Subject to the provisions of Section 10(c) above and Section 10(f) below,
and Client having paid GLS in full for all Services under the relevant SOW, Client will own and
have all right and title in all work product related to such Services and specifically produced or
generated for, and delivered to, Client by GLS under this Agreement during the term of this
Agreement (collectively, “Work Product”); provided that such Work Product is (i) based solely
on Confidential Information of Client and/or (ii) developed directly and solely as a result of
GLS’ performance of the Services. To the extent possible, all Work Product shall be considered
a work made for hire for Client within the meaning of Title 17 of the United States Code (the
Copyright Act); provided, however, that, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
Agreement, GLS reserves the right to utilize the Confidential Information of Client and Work
Product for the Services and otherwise internally for the limited purposes of the conduct of its
business, including training, research and education, and to use Confidential Information of
Client and Work Product, in the aggregate, to determine trends in the industry for the express and
limited purpose of establishing the best practices for audits, inspections and testing in the
industry, so long as no use of the Confidential Information of Client or Work Product, in the
aggregate, for this purpose will allow the identification of Client or a third party subject to the
Services or disclosure of particular Client-identifiable Confidential Information.
(f)
Further, the “Confidential Information” and “Work Product” which will
belong to Client, to the extent provided in this Section 10, will not include any Background
Technology or Preliminary Data and Materials of GLS, which at all times will remain the sole
and exclusive property of GLS. For purposes of this Agreement: (i) “Background Technology”
means all intellectual property and other proprietary rights in and to: (1) all specifications,
checklists, audit tools, scoring criteria, risk profiling tools, protocols, methods (analytical, testing
and otherwise), ideas, know-how, concepts, plans, creations, work product, reports, writings,
compilations, trade secrets, data, databases, software, files, programs, writings, models and
devices, patents, processes (including, but not limited to, polymerase chain reaction and real-time
polymerase chain reaction processes and technologies), policy developments, documents,
equipment and other materials owned, possessed, developed or acquired by, or licensed or
sublicensed to, GLS prior to the later of the date of this Agreement or disclosure to Client; and
(2) all general additions, accretions, improvements and enhancements to the same which are
owned, possessed, developed or acquired by, or licensed or sublicensed to, GLS during the term
of this Agreement that are not developed or acquired expressly and exclusively for Client; and
(ii) “Preliminary Data and Materials” means all laboratory test data, calculations, estimates,
reports and other electronic or written communications describing the results of any Services (or
element thereof) and any memoranda and status summaries prepared by or on behalf of
Contractor in connection with the Services performed hereunder (excluding any Work Product).
(g)
Client hereby acknowledges and agrees that it may not and it will not
make any Work Product available for external publication, or provide copies of any Work
Product to any third parties without obtaining GLS’ prior written consent, except that no prior
written consent will be required if disclosure of any Work Product is required by law or pursuant
to a valid and lawful subpoena or order issued by a court or Regulatory Authority having
authority to issue such subpoena or order. If Client is served with a lawful subpoena or order to

8

produce Work Product to a court or Regulatory Authority, Client will promptly notify GLS that
such a subpoena or order has been received and provide a copy thereof to GLS.
(h)
Each party hereby acknowledges and agrees that: (i) any unauthorized
disclosure or use of Confidential Information would cause irreparable harm to the disclosing
party; (ii) money damages would be inadequate to compensate the disclosing party for such
harm; and (iii) the breach or threatened breach of this Agreement may entitle the disclosing party
to obtain specific performance and injunctive relief (and each party agrees that it will not oppose
the disclosing party’s efforts to obtain such relief), in addition to any other legal remedies that
may be available. Each party hereby expressly waives any requirement for the disclosing party to
post a bond in order to obtain an injunction or other equitable relief.
11.

Representations and Warranties.

(a)
GLS hereby represents and warrants that it has the power and authority to
enter into this Agreement, and is duly licensed, authorized and qualified to perform the Services.
GLS hereby further represents and warrants that the execution of this Agreement and the
performance of the Services will not, directly or indirectly, contravene, conflict with or result in
a violation of any agreement, authorization or other obligation of GLS.
(b)
Client hereby represents and warrants that it has the power and authority
to enter into this Agreement and procure the Services. Client hereby further represents and
warrants that the execution of this Agreement and the performance of the Services will not,
directly or indirectly, contravene, conflict with or result in a violation of any agreement,
authorization or other obligation of Client.
(c)
EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT OF THE LIMITED WARRANTIES SET
FORTH IN SECTION 5 AND IN THIS SECTION 11, AND NOTWITHSTANDING ANY
PROVISION TO THE CONTRARY CONTAINED HEREIN OR IN ANY SOW, REPORT OR
OTHER STATEMENT OR INSTRUMENT, GLS MAKES NO WARRANTY OR
GUARANTEE, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, WITH RESPECT TO THE SERVICES,
INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
12.
Limitations on Scope and Use of Work Product. Client hereby acknowledges
and agrees that:
(a)
GLS is neither an insurer nor a guarantor, that GLS does not take the place
or assume the responsibilities and obligations of Client or any designer, manufacturer, agent,
buyer, distributor, transportation company or other third party, and that GLS disclaims any and
all liability in such capacities;
(b)
if Client requests GLS to perform certain Services that are required or
mandated by any Regulatory Authority, then (i) neither the performance of such Services by
GLS nor any use by Client or any third party of any portion of the sample(s) or Work Product
related to such Services will imply that GLS is subject to the jurisdiction of such Regulatory
Authority and (ii) no privity or other relationship will be created between GLS and such
Regulatory Authority as a result of the performance of such Services;

9

(c)
any Work Product produced by GLS as part of the Services performed
hereunder (x) will relate only to those specific samples actually tested by GLS as part of such
Services and (y), in no way, can be taken or relied upon as being representative of any other
portion of the lot or batch from which such samples were taken;
(d)
GLS assumes no responsibility for the purposes for which Client or any
third party uses any Work Product; and
(e)
Client may not and will not, under any circumstances, hold out or
represent to any third party that GLS has in anyway whatsoever certified, guaranteed or
otherwise passed judgment on the efficacy of any results derived from the performance of the
Services hereunder, except to the extent GLS has certified that it has performed the Services in
accordance with the provisions of the applicable SOW.
13.

Indemnification.

(a)
GLS will indemnify, defend and hold Client and its affiliates and its and
their respective officers, directors, shareholders, employees, agents and representatives (“Client
Indemnified Parties”) harmless from and against any and all losses and damages, including, but
not limited to, any and all fines, penalties, liabilities and obligations (whether known or
unknown, asserted or unasserted, absolute or contingent, accrued or unaccrued, matured or
unmatured, determined or determinable, disputed or undisputed, liquidated or unliquidated, or
due or to become due), including all reasonable fees, costs and expenses (including, without
limitation, reasonable expenses of investigation and mediation and reasonable attorneys’,
accountants’ and other professional fees) relating thereto (collectively, “Damages”), which any
Client Indemnified Party may incur or be liable for as a result of any claim, suit or proceeding or
threatened claim, suit or proceeding (collectively, “Proceedings”), directly or indirectly, arising
out of or in any way related to any breach of this Agreement by GLS; provided that, with respect
to the Services rendered by GLS under this Agreement, Client’s sole remedy shall be as set forth
in Section 6(a) above.
(b)
Client will indemnify, defend and hold GLS and its affiliates and its and
their respective officers, directors, shareholders, employees, agents and representatives (“GLS
Indemnified Parties”, and together with the Client Indemnified Parties, the “Indemnified
Parties”) harmless from and against any and all Damages, which any GLS Indemnified Party
may incur or be liable for as a result of any Proceeding, directly or indirectly, arising out of or in
any way related to any (i) breach of this Agreement by Client, (ii) adverse health effects or health
risks relating to the use of Client’s products, or (iii), to the extent asserted by any third party,
including, but not limited to, any Regulatory Authority, Services performed by GLS under this
Agreement at the request of client, provided, that Supplier has performed such Services without
having breached this Agreement.
14.
Damages; Injuries. Client acknowledges that many tests or other procedures
performed by GLS in connection with the Services may be hazardous and agrees that, except as
such injury or damage relates to the gross negligence or willful misconduct of GLS, GLS will
not be liable for any injury or damage to any property, products, employees, agents or other
representatives of Client or any third party (acting on behalf or at the request of Client) that may

10

occur during, or as a result of, the performance of the Services or any onsite visit at any of GLS’
or any of its subcontractors’ facilities conducted in connection with this Agreement. In addition,
Client will indemnify and hold each GLS Indemnified Party harmless from and against any and
all Damages which such GLS Indemnified Party may incur as a result of any Proceeding, directly
or indirectly, arising out of or in any way related to such injury or damage.
15.

Insurance. During the term of this Agreement:
(a)

GLS hereby agrees to maintain the following insurance coverage:

(i)
Worker’s Compensation Insurance to the full extent
required by the laws of the states in which the Services are being performed;
(ii)
Commercial General Liability Insurance with a combined
single limit of liability for bodily injury and property damage of not less than
$2,000,000; and
(iii)
Errors and Omissions insurance with a minimum limit of at
least $1,000,000 per occurrence and in the aggregate.
(b)
Client hereby agrees, in addition to its obligations under Section 14, to
maintain Worker’s Compensation Insurance and Commercial General Liability Insurance
sufficient to cover any and all employees, agents or other representatives of Client or any third
party (acting on behalf or at the request of Client) that will be conducting any onsite visit at any
of GLS’ or any of its subcontractors’ facilities in connection with this Agreement.
(c)
Each party hereby agrees to provide the other party with a certificate of
insurance of the insurance coverage required hereunder upon the other party’s reasonable
request.
16.
Notices. All notices and other communications given hereunder will be in
writing. Notices will be effective when delivered, if delivered personally. Otherwise, they will
be effective when sent to the parties at the addresses or numbers listed below, as follows: (i) on
the business day delivered (or the next business day following delivery if not delivered on a
business day) if personally delivered or sent by overnight delivery courier, (ii) the next business
day after transmission by telefax or other facsimile or electronic means or (iii) three business
days after mailing if mailed by registered or certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid and return
receipt requested.
If to GLS, to:
Global Laboratory Services, Inc.
2107 Black Creek Road
Wilson, North Carolina 27893
Attention: __________________
Fax No.: (252) 234-4959

11

If to Client, to:
Cognizant
221B Baker street
Dover, Delaware 56282
Attention: __________________
Fax No.: (343) 984-7137
Any person or entity may change the address or number to which notices are to be delivered to
him, her or it by giving the other persons or entities named above notice of the change in the
manner set forth above.
17.
Force Majeure. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement,
GLS will not be liable to Client by reason of any failure in performance of this Agreement if the
failure arises out of acts of God, acts of Client, acts of governmental authority, fires, strikes,
labor shortages, riots or war, acts of terrorism or any cause beyond the reasonable control of that
GLS (each, a “Force Majeure Event”). If any Force Majeure Event delays performance, GLS
will promptly notify Client thereof and the time allowed for such performance will be extended
for the length of the Force Majeure Event; provided, however, that GLS will exercise reasonable
commercial steps to minimize the delay. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if one or more Force
Majeure Events results in a delay of one-hundred twenty (120) consecutive days in the
performance of a particular SOW, Client may terminate that SOW without any further liability;
provided, however, that Client will remain subject to the provisions of Section 2(b).
18.
Entire Agreement. This Agreement, including the applicable SOWs attached
hereto from time to time, constitutes the complete and exclusive statement of the terms,
conditions and agreements between the parties and supersedes all prior understandings and
agreements, oral and written, between the parties relating to this Agreement, the Services or
other matters set forth herein or in the SOWs. This Agreement may not be modified or altered
except by written instrument duly executed by both parties.
19.
Governing Law. The parties agree that this Agreement is entered into and will
be governed by and constructed in accordance with the laws of the State of North Carolina,
without regard to its choice of laws principles.
20.

Dispute Resolution.

(a)
General. The parties desire to avoid and to settle without litigation any
controversy, claim or dispute arising out of or relating in any way to this Agreement, including
the SOWs attached hereto from time to time, (each, a “Dispute”). Accordingly, the parties agree
to engage in good faith negotiations to resolve any such Dispute and, upon failure to agree, to
utilize the mediation procedures described in Section 20(c) below as the exclusive method in
which to resolve any such Dispute.
(b)
Informal Resolution. A party to this Agreement that has a Dispute will
notify the other party of the nature of and basis for the Dispute. Within thirty (30) days after such
notice is given, the parties, each represented by a senior executive, will meet and confer in good
faith to attempt to resolve the Dispute described in the notice.

12

(c)
Mediation. In the event said senior executives are unable to resolve the
Dispute or agree upon a mechanism to resolve such Dispute during the 30-day period provided
for in Section 20(b), then the parties will use good faith efforts to resolve such Dispute through a
non-binding mediation process agreed to by the parties. The mediation of the Dispute will be
administered by one (1) mediator selected and agreed to by the parties. The mediation will be
held in Raleigh, North Carolina. The mediator’s fees and all other administrative costs and
expenses related to the mediation will be shared equally by the parties, but each party will be
responsible for its own legal fees and other costs and expenses related thereto.
21.
Construction. The parties have participated mutually in the negotiation and
drafting of this Agreement. In the event an ambiguity or question of intent or interpretation
arises, this Agreement will be construed as if drafted mutually by the parties and no presumption
or burden of proof will arise favoring or disfavoring any party by virtue of the authorship of any
of the provisions of this Agreement.
22.
Severability. If any provision of this Agreement is held invalid or unenforceable
by any court of competent jurisdiction or mediator, the other provisions of this Agreement will
remain in full force and effect. Any provision of this Agreement held invalid or unenforceable
only in part or degree will remain in full force and effect to the extent not held invalid or
unenforceable. The parties agree to replace such void or unenforceable provision of this
Agreement with a valid and enforceable provision that will achieve, to the extent possible, the
economic, business and other purpose of such void or unenforceable provision.
23.
Survival. Notwithstanding the termination or expiration of this Agreement, the
provisions of Sections 2, 3, 6, 8(a), 9(b), 10, 11(c), 12, 13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and
26 will survive the expiration or termination, as the case may be, of this Agreement.
24.
Relationship of the Parties. GLS is an independent contractor of Client and not
an employee, franchisee, agent, partner or joint venture of Client. Neither party has the authority
to bind the other party without the express written authorization of the other party. Nothing
herein may be construed so as to create an employer-employee, franchisor-franchisee, agency,
partnership, or joint venture relationship between the parties hereto.
25.

Assignment; Subcontracting.

(a)
Neither this Agreement nor the Services or SOWs hereunder may be
assigned by either of the parties or by operation of law without the prior written consent of the
other party.
(b)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 25(a), GLS may, in its sole
discretion and without Client’s consent or approval, subcontract or otherwise delegate, in whole
or in part, its obligations or the performance of the Services under this Agreement to one or more
of its affiliates or subcontractors; provided, that GLS (i) will notify Client as to (1) the extent it
so subcontracts or otherwise delegates its obligations under this Agreement and (2) the identity
of the relevant affiliate(s) or subcontractor(s), and (ii) will remain responsible for the failure of
such affiliate(s) or subcontractor(s) to perform such Services in accordance with the provisions
of this Agreement.

13

26.
Successors; Assigns. The terms and conditions of this Agreement shall inure to
the benefit of and be binding upon the respective executors, administrators, heirs, successors and
assigns permitted under this Agreement. Except as expressly provided herein, nothing in this
Agreement, express or implied, is intended to confer upon any party, other than the parties
hereto, any rights or remedies under or by reason of this Agreement.
27.
Additional Documents. Each of the parties hereto agrees to execute such other
documents as may be reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this Agreement.
28.
Headings. The headings contained in this Agreement are for reference purposes
only and will not affect the meaning or interpretation of this Agreement.
29.
Counterparts. This Agreement and any SOW hereunder may be executed in one
or more counterparts, each of which will be deemed an original and all of which, when taken
together, will constitute one and the same instrument.
[SIGNATURE PAGE FOLLOWS]

14

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement to be
effective as of the date first written above.
GLOBAL LABORATORY SERVICES, INC.

By:

____________________________________
Name:
Title:

[CLIENT]

By:

____________________________________
Name:
Title:

SIGNATURE PAGE TO MASTER SERVICES AGREEMENT

EXHIBIT A
FORM OF SAMPLE SUBMISSION FORM

See attached.
